There are lots of ways in which
closures are useful in JavaScript.
In this Framework Aside, let's talk for
a moment about how we can use closures
to our advantage for making patterns
that would be otherwise impossible.
In this case,
let's look at Function Factories.
We've already seen how we can use some of
the language features of JavaScript to
allow a function to be called under
different circumstances with different
default parameters.
We did that in our function
overloading lesson.
But here, we're going to show how
we can do even more powerful and
flexible patterns using the fact
that closures exist in JavaScript.
So, instead of creating a greet function,
I'm gonna create a factory.
A factory just means a function that
returns or makes other things for me.
So, this makeGreeting() is
going to return a function.
And I'm going to accept
a parameter language.
And then, I'm going to return a function.
I'll actually return.
I could name it greet if I want.
It doesn't really matter.
But I'll just return a function
that will be like our greet
function that we've been using.
And let me just copy and
paste in what I typed before.
So, this function that's returned
is the same logic we had before.
The language is English and it'll
console.log hello and then my first name,
last name that I pass into it.
And if language is Spanish,
this is for [FOREIGN] and
it's console.log Hola,
then first name, then last name.
But the difference is that instead of
passing language to this function,
I'm passing it to the outer function.
And then, returning that inner function.
So, the language will be trapped,
or collected in the closure.
That is, when I try to reference it here
when I execute this function object,
it will look up the scope chain.
And even though makeGreeting()
will have been done executing and
it's execution context is gone,
I'll still have access to language.
That lets me do something neat like this.
I can say, let's call it greetEnglish, and
I can execute makeGreeting() and
pass it a language.
And then, I could do greetSpanish and
execute makeGreeting() and
pass it a different language.
Now, what will I have at this point.
Stop and think about it.
What will be inside of greetEnglish and
what will read Spanish point two.
Well, makeGreeting() executes English
as the language in the first case,
and it will return a function.
That function's outer
reference will point to what
the language was when
makeGreeting() was executed here.
Then, it ends.
And so, the function that was
returned will still point to
The language variable en,
because I executed makeGreeting(), and
it was its own execution context.
Then, in the second case,
I execute my greeting again, so
it gets its own execution context
where language will be es.
So, a different spot in memory.
And the function that's returned
from there, it will point
at that execution context, spot in memory.
See that?
So, even though these two
functions lexically sit
inside the same makeGreeting(), they're
going to point at two different spots in
memory because they were created during
two different execution contexts.
Imagine that in your head, think about it.
One execution context here,
another execution context here.
And so, if I had executed
the function at this point,
if I had executed this inner one,
it would have pointed to en, English.
And if I had executed the inner function
in this case it would have pointed
to a memory space that said es.
And those are wrapped up.
Those are closed up.
I have a closure inside the result of this
and a closure inside the result of that.
So, greetEnglish is a function object
whose closure points to
language being English.
And greetSpanish is a function object
whose closure points to a different
execution context for the same function or
languages, es, Spanish.
It's important to remember that
even though it's the same function
every time I execute it,
it creates a new execution context.
It's a new memory space,
no matter how many times I call it.
So, now that I've done that,
I can call greetEnglish and
expects first name and last name.
So, I could say John and Doe.
And I can call greetSpanish this
function that was returned.
It expects a first name and a last name.
I'll say John Doe.
And now I'm executing them, and
it will execute Execute, look for
language in the scope chain.
In the first case, it will find en,
and in the second case,
it's going to find es in the scope chain.
So, when I run this, I get
Hello John Doe and [FOREIGN] John Doe.
So, my makeGreeting() function
has acted as a factory function.
And I'm taking advantage of
closures to essentially set
the parameter value that's then used
inside the function that's returned.
So, I've created a function that
is using this value always.
It always has access to
that initial parameter and
I could have other parameters in here.
And yet at the same time, my greetEnglish,
I can't really directly
access that value anymore.
This is hidden from my being able to
use it down here in the global context.
But the function itself when
it runs has access to it.
If you're confused a little, that's okay.
But let's walk it through either way.
Here's all my code for this.
Function factory.
So, when it starts, I have my
global execution context, which has
the greetEnglish, greetSpanish variables,
and the makeGreeting() function.
When I hit this line, it calls or
executes makeGreeting().
And so,
that gets it's own execution context.
And I pass language.
So, when that execution context variable
environment, language is en for English.
Then, it returns a function which
you store it in greetEnglish,
it's pointing to that function,
and makeGreeting() that time ends.
And that memory space for that execution
context is still hanging around.
Then, on my second line,
I call makeGreeting() again.
And this is the important distinction.
In the previous example we looked at
when we filled an array with functions,
we only called that outer function once,
so
all those functions inside that array
pointed to the same memory space.
But in this case,
we're calling the function twice.
When I call the second time,
I get a new execution context.
Every time you call a function,
you get a new execution context.
It doesn't matter how
many times you call it.
And so, that new execution context
has its own variable environment
and the language is Spanish in this case.
And that returns a function object,
and finishes.
So, now, I have two spots in
memory that are hanging out,
with those two separate execution
contacts, once contained.
Then, when I get to the greetEnglish,
I'm actually calling
the function that was returned.
That creates a new execution context
with first name John and last name Doe.
The outer environment reference, well,
we know it needs to point to
one of the execution contexts
created by makeGreeting,
cuz that's where it sits lexically.
And the JavaScript engine knows
that this first one was created
during that first execution context,
so it points to that one.
The one it was created inside of.
The execution context that returned it.
And so, that's where my closure is.
So, greetEnglish gives
me my English greeting.
When I hit the second line, greetSpanish,
that's pointing at a very
similar function object.
And so, that generates its
own execution context, but
that function object was created in
the second call to make greeting.
So, its outer reference points
to that second execution context that
was created for that second call.
And so, it has it's own closure.
It forms its own closure.
So, in greetSpanish executes,
it sees that language is es and
I get my Spanish greeting.
Make sense?
Again, the key is realizing that
every time you call a function,
it gets its own execution context, and
any functions created inside of it
will point to that execution context.
This is doing exactly what it should.
It's pointing to the memory space
as if those other execution
contexts hadn't disappeared.
It knows which ones to point to properly
where these inner functions
were created and when.
This is, again, a language feature.
And pretty cool.
To take a good look at this code,
try it out for yourself.
Think about it.
You'll see that this is extremely useful.
Because we can have a core set of logic,
but
then make ourselves functions
that are then easier to use.
I don't have to always
pass the same parameters.
I could just create some new
functions that have some parameters,
by default, by using closures.
So, again, take a good look at this.
Remember that this is returning a function
that has access to what this variable was,
at the time that it was created,
by pointing to that memory space.
And that lets me create
functions from other functions.
That's one of those things
that you can do in JavaScript
because functions are objects.
So, you've seen some
great examples of first
class functions and
closures in JavaScript.
Let's move on.